This lecture's just another quick example
of how to use statistical models to
explore your data and
to develop a sketch of your solution.
[MUSIC]
So this example looks at fitting
linear models to some data.
And the data that we're
gonna use is ozone and
temperature data from New York City for
the year 1999.
This data comes from
the National Morbidity and
Mortality Air Pollution Study which is
an Air Pollution Study that I was heavily
involved with.
So the data that we've got here is
just daily levels of 24 hour average
temperature and 24 hour average ozone
levels for the year 1999 in New York.
And the basic question that
we're interested in asking here
is how our ambient temperature levels
related to ambient ozone
levels in New York City, okay?
Now, just a couple things
about how ozone works.
First of all,
the development of ozone in the air
depends a lot on the amount
of sunlight that's available.
So, days with lots of sunlight
have higher temperatures
than otherwise similar days
with lower temperatures.
And so, similarly, cloudy days tend to
have lower temperature and less ozone.
So the basic idea is that we expect days
with higher temperature to
have higher ozone levels.
But this is kind of
an indirect relationship.
What we're really doing is we're
using temperature as a proxy for
the amount of sunlight that's available,
cuz we don't really actually
have any data on sunlight, okay?
So we're expecting this kind of positive
correlation between temperature and
ozone in New York City.
Now the simplest model that we can use to
describe this relationship that
we expect is a linear model.
So now the question we should
be asking right now is,
what does a linear model look like?
So remember we wanna set expectations
before we start looking at the data.
So the easiest way to do that
is to draw a fake picture.
So this picture shows two simulated
variables with a linear relationship.
Okay?
There's no actual data here.
We just simulated it on the computer.
So you can see that the data
increased from the left to the right,
like a line but
with some scatter around it.
And, furthermore, if you choose any point
on the blue line, there are roughly
the same number of points above the line
as there are below it, all right?
So we think of the line as
being kind of unbiased, right?
So if there's gonna be a deviation
from the line it's equally likely to
be above or below it.
So this is the picture that we expect
to see when we look at the data.
So it's important that we kind of set
these expectations before we look at
the data, so we know whether we are kind
of right, or wrong, or far off,
or pretty close to the mark.
So here's the actually data for
New York in 1999, with a fitted linear
regression line overlaid on top, okay.
So the first question you wanna ask
yourself is how does it compare
to what we are expecting from
the previous picture, okay.
Now one thing that we can
see is that temperature and
ozone are in fact increasing together.
When temperature is higher,
ozone does tend to be higher.
And when temperature is lower,
ozone tends to be lower.
But there are some deviations
from what we might expect
from what we saw in the previous picture.
In particular, if you look at
around 85 degrees in temperature,
you look at where the blue
line is around that point,
you'll see that most of the data points
happen to be above the line, okay?
There aren't many data points below
the line, right around that neighborhood.
Then again, if you look at the temperature
70 degrees and where the blue line
is there, you'll see that most of
the points are below the line, actually.
And there aren't that many
points above the line.
So, at around 85 degrees, what we see
is that the blue line, our model,
the linear model,
is kind of biased downwards.
And at 70 degree point mark the linear
model is actually biased upwards.
We're tending to predict too high for
what the ozone level actually is.
So what we see here is that the model
kind of captures the general
trend of kind of increasing
temperature and increasing ozone, but
it tends to be biased within
certain ranges of temperature.
So it's clearly not a perfect model.
So the observed pattern from the data
seems to suggest that the relationship
between ozone and temperature is
actually kind of flat up until about
the point where you hit 70 degrees,
72, 73 degrees.
Then there's a sharp increase
in ozone with every additional
degree of temperature.
And so this suggests that maybe
the relationship is non linear.
Okay.
So we can revise our expectations for
what the relationship should look like to
be this kind of non-linear relationship,
rather than our original expectation
of a linear relationship.
And so the way that we can check that
is by using a non-linear smoother.
Here's some data with a low-S smoother,
which is a flexible smoother that can
capture a lot of different
kinds of smooth trends, okay.
So what we can see here is that, from
the blue line, there's a sharp increase in
ozone after about 75 degrees, and
then maybe around 85 degrees or so,
there's some suggestion of
leveling off of the relationship.
So there's a suggestion of a classic
kind of S-shaped curve here,
where there's a kind of
roughly flat relationship,
then there's a sharp, increasing one and
then kind of leveling off.
Now, these smoothers like low S are very
useful for capturing these kinds of null
in your trends but they usually don't tell
you much about how things work underneath.
So we may wanna revise our original
linear model based on what we found here
to think,
to try to capture these trends and
to learn more about what's
going on underneath.